[WAKIZURE] To begin with,
I am in the service of the Emperor Ichijo.
I am known as Tachibana no Michinari.
It so happens that his Lordship
has this night had a portentous dream oracle.
The Sanjo swordsmith Munechika
must be ordered to forge a blade.
I am on my way now to tell Munechika
of this matter.
[WAKIZURE] Is Munechika at home ?
[WAKI] Who is it that has come here ?
[WAKIZURE] I am a messenger from the Emperor.
His Majesty has had a marvelous oracle in a dream.
According to the oracle, you must forge a fine sword for him.
Please comply with this order at once.
[WAKI] While I certainly must agree to execute this imperial order,
as I do not have anyone to assist me,
I do not know how I will be able to carry it out.
[WAKIZURE] What you say sir, seems most strange.
To hear that someone of your reputation
does not have an appropriate assistant,
is the most unfortunate news.
[WAKI] Even though I am commanded to do so,
without an assistant whose skills are equal to my own,
it will not be possible to fulfill this order
to forge an imperial blade.
This is the answer I must give,
though I am overcome with embarassment.
[WAKIZURE] Even though it may be as you say,
yet as this is the Emperor's wonderful dream oracle,
it surely must be relied upon
and you must quickly say
you will accept the order.
Let me repeat the imperial command!
[WAKI] At this point, in any case, Munechika
[JIUTAI] In any case, Munechika
must here decide his course of action.
Like the ripples beaten along a well-forged blade, his heart wavers.
Yet, as the reign in the present age is righteous,
a miracle may well be afforded me.
I must place my trust only in this.
[WAKIZURE] Hurry! make the sword.
[WAKI] Yes! sir.
[WAKI] This is a great task you have come to give me.
Such a command can be carried out if I ask for divine help.
As my family deity is Inari no Myojin,
I will go at once to Inari,
and pray concerning this matter.
[SHITE] Ho there! Is that the Swordsmith of Sanjō, Munechika ?
[WAKI] How mysterious! Here is someone who is certainly not an ordinary person.
There is no path from the direction from which he has appeared,
and now he has called me by name.
What manner of man are you ?
[SHITE] You have been ordered
by his Imperial Majesty
to forge a sword!
[WAKI] As I thought, you are not what you seem to be,
and events must be of great importance indeed.
I have just received the order to make a blade!
How could it be that anyone could know so soon ?
No matter how I consider it, the matter is most strange.
[SHITE] In truth, it is as you say. It is said: To know a thing one's self,
it is to find it is known by all.
[WAKI] A voice in heaven,
[SHITE] echoes on the earth!
[JIUTAI] Wall have ears:
In the world where rocks may speak,
and nothing is hidden,
nothing shall dim the radiance
of the Emperor's sword.
Only have faith
that through his Majesty's grace and the sword
will be realized as you wish.
It must be realized.
[JIUTAI] Once with such a blade, the Emperor's Three Foot Sword,
subdued the rebellion of the Ts'in by its reputation alone.
Again, the Yang Emperor, with his sword Kei
outshone the brillance of the House of Chou.
[SHITE] In later years, the Emperor Huan Tsung's Minister Chung K'ei too,
[JIUTAI] joined his spirit after death with the virtue of his sword,
and thus served at his Lord's side.
Even evil spirits and demons
were in fear of that sword's glow,
and the destruction they sought was not achieved.
[SHITE] Indeed, the virtue of the swords in China and Japan
[JIUTAI] and their miraculous power is beyond expression!
[JIUTAI] And so, it was in the early days of our history,
the Twelfth of the Imperial Line, the Emperor Keikō,
had a son known by the name
Yamato-dake.
The wild barbarians! he received the order to subdue them.
The barrier check points far behind as yet further to the East.
The road of his journey to the Eastern provinces took him.
Even at Ise and Owari the waves on the sea rise and return!
With envy he wondered always,
when he too might find himslef, with foam-drenched sleeves
returning home, even as he continued on his way.
[SHITE] In the battles in one place and in the next
[JIUTAI] Men and horses: their bodies crushed in their caverns,
their blood on the battlefields a river,
their shields swept away on crimson waves again and again.
Finally the barbarians removed their helmets,
lay down their arms and were made to surrender.
From the time of this Prince's reign, the royal sport of hunting was begun.
It was an incident that occurred,
on the twentieth day of the Tenth month:
Everywhere the autumn tints had faded,
and even on the distant winter withered mountains,
the traces of the first snow fall could be seen.
[SHITE] The barbarians surrounding him on every side
[JIUTAI] Set fire to the grass of the withered fields, and as the blaze burned high
and as the blaze burned high with heavy lingering billows of smoke.
Began to beat their war drums in the signal to attack.
The Towering flames! as the attack blazed forward
[SHITE] The Prince drew his sword
[JIUTAI] The Prince drawing his sword,
wielded it about him.
At once, the flames drew back,
as it mowed down the grasses in all directions.
The spirit of the sword became a storm
blasting back the raging flames and grasses too.
The blaze lit up the heavens, covered the earth!
A furnace of fierce flames turned back to devour the enemy forces.
Thus, the countless barbarians,
and cavalrymen were brought down.
So in later years the Empire was at peace:
So much so that the people forgot to bar the doors of their houses.
This is because of the 'Grass-cutter', it was said.
And now, this auspicious omened blade
that you must forge!
Is there any reason it should be a lesser blade than that ?
Munechika, heir to a house of proud tradition,
set your heart at rest and go home now.
[WAKI] What you have told me of the power of the swords in China and Japan
has gladdened my heart at this important hour.
Yet, I press you again to tell me who you are ?
[SHITE] Who I may be is of no consequence, but you must pray!
Before anything else adorn your forge mound
where you will temper the Imperial blade.
And at that time, if you will but wait for me.
[JIUTAI] I will change into supernatural form.
Having changed into a supernatural form,
I will come without fail, at the appointed time,
and join you, adding my strength to yours.
Then wait for me!
So saying, into the evening clouds of Mt. Inari
without a sign of where he went, he vanished,
Without a sign of where he went, he vanished.
[KYŌGEN] I am the god of a subsidiary shrine
and in the service of Inari-daimyōjin.
I have come here before you now on a matter of no small importance.
Now then, it seems that the Emperor Ichijo, sixty-sixth of the imperial line,
has recently had a portentous dream oracle.
According to it, the Sanjo swordsmith Munechika,
must be ordered to forge a blade.
At that time Minister Michinari was the imperial envoy
who gave him the details of the imperial message.
Munechika hearing the message, agreed to comply with the order,
though to forge such an important blade,
he said, was something he could not do by himself
"As it will be impossible without an assistant of skill equal to my own,
I should certainly refuse this order, but as this is a request from the Emperor himself,
I know it would bring great shame to my house to decline and so I will accept it," he said.
And so, as it would not be possible for him to forge the sword by himslef on this occasion,
in order to do it he decided he must call on divine power,
in other words, on Inari Daimyojin, his family's tutelary god.
If indeed a deity could watch over his forge,
he decided he must go at once and pray concerning the matter.
As he did this so humbly, the god of the Inari shrine knew of it and,
taking the form of a youth, appeared and met
with Munechika, and spoke to him.
Commonly, in our land there have been,
from the Age of the Gods, two sacred swords.
The one called "Totsuka no Tsurugi", the Ten-span Sword
was used by Susanō-no-mikoto, when learning of the great serpent
at the headwaters of the Hi River in the country of Izumo,
he destroyed it, due to the virtue of this sword.
Then again, the sword called "Murakumo no Tsurugi" the Gathering Clouds Sword,
was the sword he found at that time in the tail of the great serpent.
Then again, Yamatodake-no-mikoto the second son of Emperor Keikō,
the twelfth of the imperial line, subdued the people of the eastern lands,
this also due to the virtue of that sword.
From that time, it was renamed and known as 'Kusanagi-no-Tsurugi" the Grass Cutting Sword.
In addition to these, there are the Han Emperor's Three Foot Sword,
the Gan JIang and Mo Ye swords. He told him many stories
of the virtue of swords, both in China and in our own country.
"You, too, if you are a swordsmith of repute, will be able to forge a blade of equal merit.
Prepare, temper the metal, and wait."
At that time, Myojin will appear and be your assistant
in forging the blade. This being the case,
Munechika, his eyebrows relaxed in joy,
is even now coming this way to do these things.
In this way then, whe prayers are offered
they shall be fulfilled, without a doubt.
On this matter, rest assured,
rest assured.
[WAKI] Now, I, Munichika, in compliance with the Imperial Will
have accordingly ascended the dais to ward off impurities.
It is adorned with the Seven-fold Sacred Rope,
and in the four corners sacred images place in reverence.
I raise up this Sacred wand and make my petition.
Now, in the reign of the Sixty-sixth Emperor Ichijo,
I have been honored greatly in my craft,
through no effort of my own,
rather, I have held in trust those skills.
When Izanagi and Izanami crossed over
the Floating Bridge of Heaven,
and probed the Abundant Reed Plain
with the Sacred Spear was their beginning.
Later, from holy Hashimida of Eastern India
the descendants of Amakuni and Fujito
learned arts
which I am now the master of.
[WAKI] Now, I pray!
[JIUTAI] Now I petition: It is not for the glory of my name: Munechika,
but at the imperial command of the Emperor,
whose rule extends from heaven to earth, that I call on all divine beings,
numberless as the sand of the Ganges,
to join your strength now with Munechika.
I offer up this sacred wand.
I bow my head before heaven as I seek divine aid from my inmost being.
Hear and grant my prayer
[WAKI] With profound reverence:
[JIUTAI] My supplication!
[JIUTAI] Now, Munechika -- the Imperial Blade!
Now, Munechika -- the Imperial Blade!
The appointed time for forging is known!
Trust and have faith!  Only trust!
[SHITE] A young boy ascends the forge mound!
[JIUTAI] A young boy ascends the forge mound,
kneels and bows three times before Munechika.
"Now then, the metal for the blade?" he says
and Munechika, his heart joyful, in reply
brings for the metal.
As he strikes the first blow with his mallet,
[SHITE] Clang! we strike!
[JIUTAI] Clang!
[SHITE] Clang, again.
[JIUTAI] The blows coming, one on another, the sound of their mallets
echoes throughout heaven and earth - How it resounds!
[WAKI] And so the Imperial Blade is forged:
On the face of it I strike: "Munechika, Swordsmith"!
[SHITE] As your timely apprentice the god:
"Little Fox", I skillfully strike on the reverse.
[JIUTAI] Along the edge of the blade are beaten traces
like wild clustering clouds.
"Clustering Clouds of Heaven", it will be!
[SHITE] First under Heaven:
[JIUTAI] First under Heaven:
The sword with two inscriptions!
It will rule the land to the four seas,
celebrate the abundance of the five staple crops.
"I, before you, as the deity of your clan:
the manifestation of Inari: the Little Fox,
come to aid you in fulfilling your task.
Now, I am done!" So saying, takes his leave.
Once more he leaps upon the mass of clouds,
Again, more he leaps upon the mass of clouds,
and return to Higashiyama, the eastern mountains, the peak of Mt. Inari!